.. _running:

Running YANK
************

Hardware
========

Running on GPUs
"""""""""""""""

YANK uses `OpenMM <http://openmm.org>`_ as its simulation engine, which runs fastest on modern GPUs using either the ``CUDA` or ``OpenCL`` platforms.
Modern GTX-class hardware, such as the `GTX-1080 <http://www.geforce.com/hardware/10series/geforce-gtx-1080>`_ or `GTX-TITAN-X <http://www.geforce.com/hardware/desktop-gpus/geforce-gtx-titan-x>`_, should work very well.
See :ref:`Supported hardware <supported_hardware>` for more information about supported and recommended hardware.

Running on the CPU
""""""""""""""""""

If you don't have a GPU, the OpenMM ``CPU`` platform will run in multithreaded mode by default (see `Selecting a platform`_).
While not as fast as `gromacs <http://www.gromacs.org>`_, running on the CPU can still let you explore the features of YANK without needing a GPU.
You can also use CPUs acting as ``OpenCL`` devices utilizing the `AMD OpenCL APP SDK <http://developer.amd.com/tools-and-sdks/opencl-zone/>`_ or the `Intel OpenCL SDK <https://software.intel.com/en-us/intel-opencl>`_, though this has not been extensively tested.

Parallelization
===============

YANK can operate in two different modes:

Serial mode
"""""""""""

In :ref:`serial mode <serial-mode>`, a single simulation is run at a time, either on the GPU or CPU.
For replica-exchange calculations, this means that each replica is run serially, and then exchanges between replicas are allowed to occur.
This is useful if you are testing YANK, or running a large number of free energy calculations where speed is not a major concern.

MPI mode
""""""""

In :ref:`MPI mode <mpi-mode>`, multiple simulations can be run at once, either on multiple GPUs or multiple CPUs, though
running simulations on a mixture of platforms is not supported at this time.
We utilize the widely-supported
`Message Passing Interface (MPI) standard <http://www.mcs.anl.gov/research/projects/mpi/standard.html>`_ for parallelization.
All simulations are run using the same OpenMM ``Platform`` choice (``CUDA``, ``OpenCL``, ``CPU``, or ``Reference``)

- Cuda visible devices
- Config thing
- SLURM

No GPU management is needed on single GPU/node systems.

Multi-GPU and multi-node systems require masking the GPUs so YANK only sees the one its suppose to. Effectively you need
to set the ``CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES`` variables on each process to mask all but the 1 card you want to use. We cannot provide
a universal solution as systems will differ, but we can provide some general rules of thumb.

* |torquepbs|

.. |torquepbs| replace::
    ``torque`` or ``PBS`` cluster - Install the `clusterutils <https://github.com/choderalab/clusterutils>`__ module (automatic when YANK
    is installed from CONDA). Run the ``build_mpirun_configfile "yank --script=yank.yaml"`` targeting your YAML file.
    The command works by targeting the cluster's ``$PBS_GPUFILE`` to determine device IDs as the cluster sees them.


* ``SLURM`` cluster - SLURM should automatically handle the GPU ``CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES`` variable for you. You will still need to set the number of processes to run in MPI mode.

We recommend running YANK with an MPI configfile. You can specify all of these sets to ``CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES`` by hand,
but it will make for a long command line. Creating a configfile to feed into MPI is the preferred option for this reason.
Below we show an example of one such config file on a 2 node, 4 GPU/node torque cluster (8 processes distributed over
2 nodes):

.. code-block:: bash

    -hosts gpu-1-4:1,gpu-1-4:1,gpu-1-4:1,gpu-1-4:1,gpu-2-17:1,gpu-2-17:1,gpu-2-17:1,gpu-2-17:1
    -np 1 -env CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES 3 yank script --yaml=freesolv.yaml :
    -np 1 -env CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES 2 yank script --yaml=freesolv.yaml :
    -np 1 -env CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES 1 yank script --yaml=freesolv.yaml :
    -np 1 -env CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES 0 yank script --yaml=freesolv.yaml :
    -np 1 -env CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES 3 yank script --yaml=freesolv.yaml :
    -np 1 -env CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES 2 yank script --yaml=freesolv.yaml :
    -np 1 -env CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES 1 yank script --yaml=freesolv.yaml :
    -np 1 -env CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES 0 yank script —yaml=freesolv.yaml

Hopefully this example helps you construct your own configfile if the ``build_mpirun_configfile`` is unavailable or you
are on a custom system.

Simulations may be started in one mode and then can be resumed using another parallelization mode or OpenMM ``Platform``.
The NetCDF files generated by YANK are platform-portable and hardware agnostic, so they can be moved from system to
system if you want to start a simulation on one system and resume it elsewhere.

Parallelization is "pleasantly parallel", where information is exchanged only every few seconds or more.
This does not require high-bandwidth interconnects such as `Infiniband <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InfiniBand>`_;
10Gbit/s ethernet connections should work very well.

We show a more formal "use case" of setting up an MPI run :ref:`below <mpi-mode>`.

.. _getting-help:

Getting help
============

To get a list of all command-like options, simply use the ``--help`` flag:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ yank --help

|

.. _serial-mode:

Running in serial mode
======================

To run the simulation in serial mode, simply use ``yank run``, specifying a store directory by ``--store=dirname``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ yank script --yaml=yank.yaml

The optional ``--verbose`` flag will show additional output during execution.

.. _mpi-mode:

Running in MPI mode
===================

Alternatively, to run the simulation in MPI mode:

.. code-block:: none

   $ yank script --yaml=yank.yaml

On systems with multiple NVIDIA GPUs per node, it is necessary to perform masking using ``CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES``.

On systems using the conda-installed ``mpi4py`` package, the `MPICH2 hydra mpirun <https://wiki.mpich.org/mpich/index.php/Using_the_Hydra_Process_Manager>`_ will be automatically installed for you.
You can use the cluster utility script `build-mpirun-configfile.py <https://github.com/choderalab/clusterutils/blob/master/scripts/build-mpirun-configfile.py>`_ available in our `clusterutils <https://github.com/choderalab/clusterutils>`_ tools to generate an appropriate ``configfile``:

.. code-block:: none

  $ build-mpirun-configfile "yank script --yaml=yank.yaml"
  $ mpirun -configfile configfile

``build-mpirun-configfile`` is automatically installed with YANK when you use the ``conda`` installation route.

|

Selecting a platform
====================

OpenMM supports running simulations on a number of platforms, though not all platforms are available on all hardware.
To see which platforms your current installation supports, you can query the list of available platforms with

.. code-block:: none

  $ yank platforms
  Available OpenMM platforms:
      0 Reference
      1 CUDA
      2 CPU
      3 OpenCL

You can either leave the choice of platform up to YANK---in which case it will choose the fastest available platform---or specify
the desired platform via the :ref:`platform argument <yaml_options_platform>` in a YAML file.

You can also (*although not recommended*) override the platform selection through the ``yank script -o`` flag.
For example, to force YANK to use the ``OpenCL`` platform:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ yank script --yaml=yank.yaml -o options:platform:OpenCL

See the ``yank script`` command line docs for more information on the ``-o`` flag.

.. note:: The ``CPU`` platform will automatically use all available cores/hyperthreads in serial mode, but in MPI mode, will use a single thread to avoid causing problems in queue-regulated parallel systems.  To control the number of threads yourself, set the ``OPENMM_NUM_THREADS`` environment variable to the desired number of threads.


Extending Simulations
=====================

One common operation when running simulations is to collect additional samples from an already run simulation to get
better statistics. Alternately, when running on shared resources, you may need to break up long simulations into smaller
simulations run in series. YANK provides a way to run its simulations in this manner by extending its simulations.

YANK's :doc:`YAML <yamlpages/index>` files have two main options that work together to extend simulations.
In order to extend simulations, set the following options in a YAML fie:

.. code-block:: yaml

  number_of_iterations: <Integer>
  extend_simulation: True

First you set :ref:`yaml_options_number_of_iterations` to an integer number of iterations you wish to extend the
simulation. If no simulation has been run yet, then one will be run for the number of iterations.
Setting :ref:`yaml_options_extend_simulation` to ``True`` modifies the behavior of
:ref:`yaml_options_number_of_iterations` to extend the simulation by the specified number, adding on to what is already
on the file.

One could optionally just increase :ref:`yaml_options_number_of_iterations`, but then you have to change
the YAML file every time you want to extend the run. Setting :ref:`yaml_options_extend_simulation` allows you to run
the same YAML file without modification to do the same thing.


You should also set the following two options as well as :ref:`yaml_options_number_of_iterations` and
:ref:`yaml_options_extend_simulation`:

.. code-block:: yaml

  resume_setup: yes
  resume_simulation: yes

:ref:`resume_setup <yaml_options_resume_setup>` and :ref:`resume_simulation <yaml_options_resume_simulation>` allow
YANK to resume simulations if it detects existing setup file or simulation output respectively. YANK will raise an error
if these are not set and files exist to protect against overwrite. The only reason these are not mandatory is that if
no files exist (i.e. fresh simulation), then the simulation will run without error once.


Extending Previous Simulations from Command Line
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

You may already have a simulation that you previously ran, but do not want to modify the YAML to extend the simulation.
In this case, your YAML file has ``extend_simulation: False`` or is not set, and you only want to interact with the
simulation through the command line. You can override individual settings from the command line; the settings for
extending simulation would look like:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ yank script --yaml=yank.yaml -o options:extend_simulation:True -o options:number_of_iterations:X

where ``X`` is the integer number you wish to extend the simulation by. The second option to override
``number_of_iterations`` is optional if you are happy the existing option in the YAML file.

See the ``yank script`` command line docs for more information on the ``-o`` flag.